ans/ANS-104.md, before:

# ANS-104: Bundled Data v2.0 - Binary Serialization

Status: Standard

## Abstract

This document describes the data format and directions for reading and writing bundled binary data. Bundled data is a way of writing multiple independent data transactions (referred to as DataItems in this document) into one top level transaction. A DataItem shares many of the same properties as a normal data transaction, in that it has an owner, data, tags, target, signature, and id. It differs in that is has no ability to transfer tokens, and no reward, as the top level transaction pays the reward for all bundled data.

## Motivation

Bundling multiple data transactions into one transaction provides a number of benefits:

- Allow delegation of payment for a DataItem to a 3rd party, while maintaining the identity and signature of the person who created the DataItem, without them needing to have a wallet with funds

- Allow multiple DataItems to be written as a group

- Increase the throughput of logically independent data-writes to the Arweave network

## Reference Implementation

There is a reference implementation for the creation, signing, and verification of DataItems and working with bundles in [TypeScript](https://github.com/ArweaveTeam/arweave-data)

## Specification

### 1. Transaction Format

#### 1.1 Transaction Tags

A bundle of DataItems MUST have the following two tags present:

- `Bundle-Format` a string describing the bundling format. The format for this standard is `binary`
- `Bundle-Version` a version string. The version referred to in this standard is `2.0.0`

Version changes may occur due to a change in encoding algorithm in the future

#### 1.2 Transaction Body Format

This format for the transaction body is binary data in the following bytes format

`N = number of DataItems`

| Bytes                              | Purpose                                       |
|---                                 |---                                            |
|32                                  |Numbers of data items                          |
|`N` x 64                            |Pairs of offset and entry ids [offset (32 bytes), entry ID (32 bytes)]|
|Remaining bytes                     |Binary encoded data items in bundle            |

#### 1.3 DataItem Format

A DataItem is a binary encoded object that has similar properties to a transaction

|Field     |Description                                     | Encoding        | Optional |
|---       |---                                             |---              | --- |
|owner     |The public key of the owner                     | Binary            | :x: |
|target    |An address that this DataItem is being sent to  | Binary            | :heavy_check_mark: |
|nonce     |A value to prevent replay attacks               | Binary            |:heavy_check_mark: |
|tags      |An array of tag objects                         | Binary      |:x: |
|data      |The data contents                               | Binary            |      :x: |            
|signature |A signature produced by owner                   | Binary            |  :x: |
|id        |The id of the DataItem                                 | Binary            |:x: |

A tag object is a binary object representing a tuple `(String, String)` with the following two values.

|Field     |Description               | Encoding        | Optional |
|---       |---                       |---              |---
|name      |Name of the tag           | Binary          | :x: |
|value     |Value of the tag          | Binary          | :x: |

The fields in the DataItem and Tags objects can be handled in an identical way as their counterpart in a regular Arweave transaction.

The `nonce` and `target` fields in DataItem are optional. The nonce is an arbitrary value to allow bundling gateways to provide protection from replay attacks against them or their users.

### 2. DataItem signature and id

The signature and id for a DataItem is built in a manner similar to Arweave 2.0 transaction signing. It uses the Arweave 2.0 deep-hash algorithm. The 2.0 deep-hash algorithm operates on arbitrarily nested arrays of binary data, i.e a recursive type of `DeepHashChunk = Uint8Array | DeepHashChunk[]`.

There are reference implementations for the deep-hash algorithm in [TypeScript](https://github.com/ArweaveTeam/arweave-js/blob/b1c4b2e378a1eb7dc1fbfaeee41492eb908a60c6/src/common/lib/deepHash.ts) and [Erlang](https://github.com/ArweaveTeam/arweave/blob/b316173cd42a53a59036241f8e164b615db9b40d/apps/arweave/src/ar_deep_hash.erl)

To generate a valid signature for a DataItem, the contents of the DataItem and static version tags are passed to the deep-hash algorithm to obtain a message. This message is signed by the owner of the DataItem to produce the signature. The id of the DataItem, is the SHA256 digest of this signature.

The exact structure and content passed into the deep-hash algorithm to obtain the message to sign is as follows:

```
[
  utf8Encoded("dataitem"),
  utf8Encoded("1"),
  owner,
  target,
  nonce,
  [
    ... [ tag.name, tag.value ],
    ... [ tag.name, tag.value ],
    ...
  ],
  data
]
```

### 2.1 Verifying a DataItem

DataItem verification is a key to maintaining consistency within the bundle standard.
A DataItem is valid iff:

 - id matches the signature (?)
 - signature matches the owner's public key
 - tags are all valid

A tag object is valid iff:
 - there are <= 128 tags
 - each key is <= 1024 bytes
 - each value is <= 3072 bytes
 - only contains a key and value
 - both the key and value are non-empty strings

### 3. Writing a Bundle of DataItems

To write a bundle of DataItems, each DataItem should be constructed, signed, encoded, and placed in a transaction with the transaction body format and transaction tags specified in Section 1.

### 4. Reading a Bundle of DataItems

To read a bundle of DataItems, the list of bytes representing the DataItems can be partitioned using the offsets in each pair.
Subsequently, each partition can be parsed to a DataItem object (`struct` in languages such as Rust/Go etc. or `JSON` in TypeScript). 

This allows for querying of a singleton or a bundle as a whole.

Commit message:

Add section on delimiters and indexing

ans/ANS-104.md, after:

# ANS-104: Bundled Data v2.0 - Binary Serialization

Status: Standard

## Abstract

This document describes the data format and directions for reading and writing bundled binary data. Bundled data is a way of writing multiple independent data transactions (referred to as DataItems in this document) into one top level transaction. A DataItem shares many of the same properties as a normal data transaction, in that it has an owner, data, tags, target, signature, and id. It differs in that is has no ability to transfer tokens, and no reward, as the top level transaction pays the reward for all bundled data.

## Motivation

Bundling multiple data transactions into one transaction provides a number of benefits:

- Allow delegation of payment for a DataItem to a 3rd party, while maintaining the identity and signature of the person who created the DataItem, without them needing to have a wallet with funds

- Allow multiple DataItems to be written as a group

- Increase the throughput of logically independent data-writes to the Arweave network

## Reference Implementation

There is a reference implementation for the creation, signing, and verification of DataItems and working with bundles in [TypeScript](https://github.com/ArweaveTeam/arweave-data)

## Specification

### 1. Transaction Format

#### 1.1 Transaction Tags

A bundle of DataItems MUST have the following two tags present:

- `Bundle-Format` a string describing the bundling format. The format for this standard is `binary`
- `Bundle-Version` a version string. The version referred to in this standard is `2.0.0`

Version changes may occur due to a change in encoding algorithm in the future

#### 1.2 Transaction Body Format

This format for the transaction body is binary data in the following bytes format

`N = number of DataItems`

| Bytes                              | Purpose                                       |
|---                                 |---                                            |
|32                                  |Numbers of data items                          |
|`N` x 64                            |Pairs of offset and entry ids [offset (32 bytes), entry ID (32 bytes)]|
|Remaining bytes                     |Binary encoded data items in bundle            |

#### 1.3 DataItem Format

A DataItem is a binary encoded object that has similar properties to a transaction

|Field     |Description                                     | Encoding        |Length (in bytes)| Optional |
|---       |---                                             |---              |---| --- |
|signature |A signature produced by owner                   | Binary            |32|  :x: |
|id        |The id of the DataItem                                 | Binary            |32|:x: |
|owner     |The public key of the owner                     | Binary            |32| :x: |
|target    |An address that this DataItem is being sent to  | Binary            |32 (+ optional bit)| :heavy_check_mark: |
|nonce     |A value to prevent replay attacks               | Binary            |32 (+ optional bit)|:heavy_check_mark: |
|tags      |An array of tag objects                         | Binary      |Variable|:x: |
|data      |The data contents                               | Binary            |Variable|      :x: |            

All optional fields will have a leading byte which describes whether the field is optional (`1` for optional, `0` for mandatory). Any other value for this byte makes the DataItem invalid.

A tag object is a binary object representing a tuple `(String, String)` with the following two values.

|Field     |Description               | Encoding        |Length  | Optional |
|---       |---                       |---              |---     |---
|name      |Name of the tag           | Binary          |Variable| :x:      |
|value     |Value of the tag          | Binary          |Variable| :x:      |

The fields in the DataItem and Tags objects can be handled in an identical way as their counterpart in a regular Arweave transaction.

The `nonce` and `target` fields in DataItem are optional. The nonce is an arbitrary value to allow bundling gateways to provide protection from replay attacks against them or their users.

#### 1.4 DataItem field delimiter

The fields on each DataItem will either be fixed-sized or used run-length encoding in order to describe the fields' length. This allows the parser to know the bytes relevant to each field

### 2. DataItem signature and id

The signature and id for a DataItem is built in a manner similar to Arweave 2.0 transaction signing. It uses the Arweave 2.0 deep-hash algorithm. The 2.0 deep-hash algorithm operates on arbitrarily nested arrays of binary data, i.e a recursive type of `DeepHashChunk = Uint8Array | DeepHashChunk[]`.

There are reference implementations for the deep-hash algorithm in [TypeScript](https://github.com/ArweaveTeam/arweave-js/blob/b1c4b2e378a1eb7dc1fbfaeee41492eb908a60c6/src/common/lib/deepHash.ts) and [Erlang](https://github.com/ArweaveTeam/arweave/blob/b316173cd42a53a59036241f8e164b615db9b40d/apps/arweave/src/ar_deep_hash.erl)

To generate a valid signature for a DataItem, the contents of the DataItem and static version tags are passed to the deep-hash algorithm to obtain a message. This message is signed by the owner of the DataItem to produce the signature. The id of the DataItem, is the SHA256 digest of this signature.

The exact structure and content passed into the deep-hash algorithm to obtain the message to sign is as follows:

```
[
  utf8Encoded("dataitem"),
  utf8Encoded("1"),
  owner,
  target,
  nonce,
  [
    ... [ tag.name, tag.value ],
    ... [ tag.name, tag.value ],
    ...
  ],
  data
]
```

#### 2.1 Verifying a DataItem

DataItem verification is a key to maintaining consistency within the bundle standard.
A DataItem is valid iff:

 - id matches the signature (?)
 - signature matches the owner's public key
 - tags are all valid

A tag object is valid iff:
 - there are <= 128 tags
 - each key is <= 1024 bytes
 - each value is <= 3072 bytes
 - only contains a key and value
 - both the key and value are non-empty strings

### 3. Writing a Bundle of DataItems

To write a bundle of DataItems, each DataItem should be constructed, signed, encoded, and placed in a transaction with the transaction body format and transaction tags specified in Section 1.

### 4. Reading a Bundle of DataItems

To read a bundle of DataItems, the list of bytes representing the DataItems can be partitioned using the offsets in each pair.
Subsequently, each partition can be parsed to a DataItem object (`struct` in languages such as Rust/Go etc. or `JSON` in TypeScript). 

This allows for querying of a singleton or a bundle as a whole.

#### 4.1 Indexing a DataItems

This format allows for indexing of specific fields in `O(N)` time. Some form of caching or indexing could be performed by gateways to improve lookup times.
