# ANS-109: Vouch-For (Assertion of Identity)

Status: Draft (Version `0.1`)

Authors: Abhav Kedia (abhav@arweave.org), Sam Williams (sam@arweave.org), Tom Wilson (tom@hyper.io)

## Abstract

This document specifies a transaction format that allows addresses to vouch for the identity of other addresses on the permaweb. 

## Motivation

Sybil resistance is a necessary component of most applications on the permaweb. A transaction format that allows addresses to `vouch` for the identity of other addresses enables human and programmatic Verifiers to confirm the humanity of addresses. All other applications can then utilize this information as a primitive for identity verification, with various safeguards that can be built on top. 

One example of abstractions and safeguards built on top of such a system could be a "VerifiersDAO" - a community that specifies which human "Verifiers" or "Verification Services" they deem to be trustworthy at a given point in time. 

## Specfication

### Transaction Format

A Verifier can assert the identity of an `address` using the `Vouch-For` standard by sending a transaction with the following tags. 

| Tag Name | _Optional?_ | Tag Value |
|---|---|---|
|App-Name|False|`Vouch`|
|Vouch-For|False|Arweave `address` that is being vouched for in this transaction|
|App-Version|True|`0.1`|
|Verification-Method|True| Method of verification of identity for the person. Example - `Twitter`/`In-Person`/`Gmail`/`Facebook`|
|User-Identifier|True|An identifier for the user based on the Verification Method. Example - `abhav@arweave.org`|

### Usage

Users of this standard can run a graphql query on the arweave network with transactions of the `Vouch-For` standard that vouch for a particular `address` to be verified. For example, 

```
query {
  transactions(
    tags:{name:"Vouch-For", values:["0L_z90sYv36VDoDhrRBffo9KrADWpCaaGQz7hJhhP9g"]}
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        id
        tags {
          name 
          value 
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

This query returns all vouches for the address `0L_z90sYv36VDoDhrRBffo9KrADWpCaaGQz7hJhhP9g`. Additional filters (such as those by an implementation of "VerifiersDAO" as outlined above) can be applied by filtering for specific owners that have been designated as Verifiers. 

