# ANS-106: Do-Not-Store Request

Status: Draft-1

Authors: Abhav Kedia <abhav@arweave.org>, Sam Williams <sam@arweave.org>

## Abstract

This document describes a transaction format that users of the Arweave network can use to request miners to not store certain kinds of data, for various reasons. In order to request non-storage, upload a transaction with the transaction ID of the data in question, along with tags as specified here. Upon receiving this data, nodes in the network will independently decide whether or not to accept the request. 

## Motivation
The Arweave permanent storage protocol enables a truly permanent digital store of media and documents. 

There might be various reasons why persons or entities might wish to remove some data from the network. These include privacy, government regulation and copyright violations. By uploading a transaction that adheres to this standard, users of the network can ensure that their request is broadcast to all relevant storage node operators.

## Specification

### Transaction Format

A Do-Not-Store Request transaction MUST be a transaction with the following tags:

| Tag Name | _Optional?_ | Tag Value |
|---|---|---|
|App-Name|False|`Do-Not-Store`|
|Category|True|`Category-Tag`|
|Geography|True|If requesting removal in particular countries, include the 2 letter `Country-Code` (Alpha-2, ISO 3166)|
|Content-Type|True|A guide to the type of content included in the body of the transaction, in order to aid rendering.|

The body of the transaction must then include a text description of the reason for the case describing why the data should not be stored.

### Category-Tags

Category tags are a short-hand way of specifying the reason for removal. Common tags include `Private`, `Regulation`, 'Copyright'. Custom category tags may be used as appropriate. Custom tags must not exceed 50 characters. 

## Future work
There may be a need to request removal based on various properties of data or tags associated with them. This standard may be extended to allow for lists of transactions and/or associated filtering criteria. 
