# ANS-108: Render-With

Authors: Sam Williams <sam@arweave.org>, Abhav Kedia <abhav@arweave.org>

## Abstract

This document describes a standard for specifying the default application for rendering any media stored on Arweave. 

## Motivation

Applications using Arweave protocol's permanent storage layer often store raw information on Arweave, such as raw text, images and videos. This information typically has substantial metadata associated with it, which may be lost if the media is shared pre-rendered by applications built on top of Arweave. A standard way to specify a rendering application for such data allows directly sharing the `Transaction ID` of the raw data asset (which is atomically linked to its associated Metadata) and have it be rendered/experienced in the way it was meant to be viewed. 

## Specification

### Uploaders

The entire specification for a data uploader consists of a simple tag that Arweave data uploaders can use to specify a default way for the information to be rendered. 

| Tag Name | _Optional?_ | Tag Value |
|---|---|---|
|Render-With|False|`Renderer-TX-ID`|


### Gateways

When serving data stored on Arweave, if a particular Arweave `TX-ID` contains the `Render-With` tag, gateways MUST use the information stored in the `Render-With` tag to redirect from `/{TX-ID}` to `/{Renderer-TX-ID}?tx={TX-ID}`, _unless_ the original transaction came with a `?render=false` query parameter. 

As an example, consider serving [Metaweave](https://metaweave.xyz/) post data via the arweave.net gateway. When any user accesses `https://arweave.net/MetaweavePostID`, they are redirected to `https://arweave.net/MetaweaveRendererID?tx=MetaweavePostID` if the `MetaweavePostID` Arweave transaction contains the tag `Render-With: MetaweaveRendererID`. 

### Renderers

Renderers must implement a [permaweb application](https://arwiki.wiki/#/en/the-permaweb) that accepts the query parameter `tx={TX-ID}`, and returns a rendering of the specified transaction. 

